Jehovah cherishes all who serve him loyally, regardless of their circumstances.
Do you truly understand why Jehovah loves those who situation in life may be very different
from your own?
If so, you are in a much better position to show them your love and support.
Please listen closely as Brother William Mellonfont, a helper to the Teaching Committee, begins
this symposium with the talk, successful fighters for the faith, those with unbelieving
mates.
Each speaker will then introduce the one to follow.
Brother Mellonfont, you have our attention.
Jehovah God's inspired word makes this significant declaration at Titus, chapter 2, and
verse 11.
It reads,
For the undeserved kindness of God has been manifested, bringing salvation to all sorts
of people.
Yes, to all sorts of people.
This was true in the first century, and it's true today more than ever before.
We are a worldwide brotherhood made up of all sorts of people who have come to a knowledge
of the truth, and we have made the decision to serve Jehovah.
In this symposium, we will discuss three sorts of people.
First, those whose mates are not yet Jehovah's Witnesses, second, those who are being raised
by one believing parent or relative, and third, those who are single.
Many brothers and sisters who find themselves in these situations are successfully putting
up a hard fight for the faith as stated in Jude, verse 3.
And all of them are valuable assets to the congregation.
So as we discuss each situation during this symposium, please focus your attention on those
who are in the congregation that you attend and ask yourself.
How can I show my appreciation for brothers and sisters who have these circumstances?
And ask yourself, if I am in one of the situations being discussed, what will help me to continue
to fight successfully for the faith?
This talk will focus on Christians with unbelieving mates.
For a well-known example, we look back to the first century to a woman named Eunice, the
mother of Timothy.
She is referred to in Acts 161, which says that Timothy was the son of a believing Jewish
woman, but of a Greek father.
So it refers to Eunice as a believing woman, but it does not refer to Timothy's father
as a believing man.
The point is that Timothy's father was not a Christian.
Nevertheless, Eunice, his mother, along with Lois, his grandmother, taught Timothy the
holy writings, the truth as found in God's Word.
When we speak of unbelieving mates, we recognize that their circumstances are not all the same.
Some non-witness mates oppose true worship.
Others are indifferent, and others may be tolerant, even somewhat interested and supportive,
but they may not be progressing toward baptism.
Some mates of believers are baptized, but they have weakened spiritually.
They may no longer be regular at meetings, go in service, or participate in family worship.
And last of all, sad to say, some mates are disfellowshipped, but we never give up on
unbelieving mates, and we always hope that any who are disfellowshipped will come to
their senses, repent, and return to Jehovah.
Is there something that we as publishers in the congregation can do to show appreciation
for fellow believers whose mates are not yet serving Jehovah?
Yes, there is.
And the Apostle Paul tells us at Philippians chapter 3, verse 17, that we can learn from
their good example and imitate them.
Philippians chapter 3, verse 17 says,
"...unitedly become imitators of me, brothers, and keep your eye on those who are walking
in a way that is in harmony with the example we set for you."
So Paul tells us to look closely at his example and the fine example of others in the congregation.
Among those setting a fine example are brothers and sisters who have unbelieving mates.
They have worked hard to maintain a strong relationship with Jehovah.
They have cultivated self-discipline to keep a good schedule of theocratic activities.
And many have become proficient in balancing family obligations with spiritual pursuits.
It's not easy, but they are doing it.
So how should we view them and treat them?
We do what Philippians chapter 2, verse 4 tells us to do.
We look out not only for our own interests, but also for the interests of others.
That means that we show concern for their well-being.
We treat them with respect.
We certainly do not ignore them.
We recognize that as spiritual people, they have much to offer.
Isn't it wonderful that we are family and we belong to one another?
We take brothers and sisters who have unbelieving mates into account.
And we look out for their interests as the scripture states because we love them and
we see their good qualities.
So what can we do?
Whenever possible, we should include them in our activities.
But what else can we do?
We can show interest in their mates and try to help them spiritually.
For example, if circumstances allow, invite them with their mates for a meal or to a gathering.
You know that friendliness and upbuilding conversation can have a powerful effect on a person's
heart.
As you watch the following video, think about how you can show appreciation for any in your
congregation whose mates are not presently serving Jehovah.
It was when my husband was really opposed.
One night, he put a knife to his stomach and said, will you choose me or the truth?
My husband was cooperative.
He would wave goodbyes we went to the meetings.
But he wasn't interested at all.
I felt really jealous when I saw families sitting together at assemblies.
Because of work and taking care of his mother, my husband gradually started missing meetings.
I'm in our congregation with good intentions pointed it out to him.
But the way they did this made him feel misunderstood and discouraged.
And he put the Bible and the publications away.
I also had times when I wanted to drift away with him.
I was really happy when I learned the truth.
In my zeal, I bombarded my husband with information and that made him worry that I had turned
into a fanatic.
I think he was genuinely concerned for his family and thought that I had joined a weird
religion.
One family in the congregation often invited us to meals and outdoor activities.
I think my husband appreciated those small acts of kindness.
I also tried to show that I appreciated him through my speech and conduct.
When my children and I applied what we learned in our lives, I think he gradually became interested
in the truth.
The words safeguard your heart caught my eye.
I decided to try and keep my heart and my children's hearts towards Jehovah.
When I went out in the ministry with my children, I would point out various aspects of God's
creation around us.
And before my husband would come home from work, I made it a habit to teach them God's
word.
I made a conscious effort to see myself in paradise with my husband.
This strengthened my resolve to never leave the truth.
I wrote caring notes to my husband when I went to the meetings.
I was convinced that he would come back one day.
And he did come back.
I did not leave Jehovah and so Jehovah never abandoned me.
My husband never embraced the truth.
However, right now, all five of my children are in the truth and I feel really blessed.
Being able to serve Jehovah as a family, along with my husband, the joy and appreciation
just keep dwelling up.
What did we learn from the video?
We learned that believing mates who display fine Christian qualities can have a positive
influence on mates who are not yet serving Jehovah.
So what will help you to keep on fighting for the faith?
Wisdom and strength that only Jehovah can provide.
Remember, his power is unlimited and he finds pleasure in showing favor to those who trust
in him.
So you know that he loves you and that he listens to sincere prayers from those who want
to do things his way.
The combination of God's love, prayer and his spirit can give you the strength and the
wisdom you need to maintain a balanced routine of spiritual activities while making sure to
care for your family responsibilities.
In the video, the believing mates took advantage of all the spiritual food that was available
to build themselves up.
And Jehovah helped them to display the spiritual qualities of patience and tact.
You know as well as I do that at times we may not be as tactful as we should be.
Being patient and tactful is not always easy, especially when you're tired and feel
disappointed by your mates' words or actions.
And yet, regardless of your situation, Jehovah can supply you with the power to keep setting
a fine example as you keep on praying that your mate will eventually respond to the truth.
First Peter, chapter three, verses one and two, first Peter, three, one and two.
We find this very wise and practical counsel.
First Peter, three, one and two reads, in the same way you wives be in subjection to your
husbands, so that if any are not obedient to the Word, they may be one without a Word
through the conduct of their wives.
Because of having been eyewitnesses of your chaste conduct together with deep respect.
Isn't that wonderful?
The counsel that Peter gives is tested and true.
This application has helped an untold number of unbelieving mates to accept the truth.
And when you think about it, it truly is amazing how deep respect and fine conduct can
win over an unbelieving mate without a Word being spoken.
Of course, as you work what is good towards your mate, there undoubtedly will be opportunities
to speak about the truth and provide spiritual assistance when circumstances permit and
it seems appropriate.
So keep on setting a fine example and praying that your mate will respond to the truth.
Have faith in the inspired words that Paul wrote at 1 Corinthians chapter seven and
verse sixteen.
1 Corinthians seven sixteen and remember to continue to show a positive attitude towards
your mate.
1 Corinthians seven sixteen poses two questions, but with a positive slant, chapter seven
and verse sixteen read, for wife, how do you know whether you will save your husband?
For husband, how do you know whether you will save your wife?
Yes, this text is telling us to remain positive about the possibility of a mate taking the
truth.
And it is a fact that many unbelieving mates have accepted the truth because of observing
a husband or a wife who follows God's direction.
Therefore, we continue to hope, wholeheartedly, that in time unbelieving mates will respond
to the truth and find pleasure in serving Jehovah.
As you apply divine counsel from God's Word, be assured that with Jehovah's help, you can
continue to be a successful fighter for the faith and bring honor to Jehovah God.
Brother Seth Hyatt, a helper to the service committee, will consider the next talk.
Successful fighters for the faith, those being raised by single parents.
At Psalm 68 verse five, Jehovah is called a father of the fatherless.
Are you a fatherless child?
Or do you have a fatherless child or fatherless children in your congregation?
You may be wondering, what do we mean by fatherless child?
Well in the context of our discussion, we're talking about young people who have only one
believing parent, one parent in the truth.
Now that allows for a spectrum of possibilities.
It could be a single parent family.
It could be a religiously divided family and especially when the unbeliever is opposed.
It could even include a situation where only one parent is actively serving Jehovah.
I was five years old when my mother learned the truth from the Bible.
For some years I lived in a religiously divided home and eventually my mother became a single
parent and we dealt with those circumstances.
There are many of us here at Bethel, in the field pioneering, serving as missionary, circuit
overseers, construction workers, many of us who experienced similar circumstances.
Being lay in the Bible, Jehovah saw fit to include the life experience of a young man
who grew up in a religiously divided home.
Timothy, the Bible describes him as having a believing Jewish mother, but a Greek father.
He had only one parent who served Jehovah.
Now we know that his mother, Yunus and his grandmother, Lojas, were instrumental in helping
him become well-founded in the truth.
But the scriptures indicate others had a share in his spiritual advancement as well.
And that's where all of us come into this conversation.
All of us, like Jehovah, need to appreciate the fatherless children and our congregations.
We should view them as modern-day Timothy's.
How do we do that?
Well, we can learn a lot from the Apostle Paul.
Late in the year 49 or early 50 CE, the Apostle Paul on his second missionary journey visited
the city of Lystra and there he observed Timothy.
Not just in a casual way, Paul really saw Timothy.
He observed his potential and he took the initiative to provide training so that Timothy
could realize that potential.
That's a beautiful example for us.
We need to take note of and encourage the fatherless children in our midst.
The Apostle Paul set a nice example in something that he wrote to Timothy.
In the year 65 CE, Paul was a prisoner in Rome with no prospect of being released.
In fact, his death was imminent.
Time to write one more letter, to whom did he write?
To Timothy, his beloved child in the faith.
And what did he have to say to Timothy in this last inspired letter?
Let's read it together.
Timothy chapter 1, 2 Timothy chapter 1 verse 5.
For I recall your unhypocritical faith, which dwelled first in your grandmother Loas and
your mother Unas, but which I am confident is also in you.
Did you notice what Paul did?
In just a few words, he commended and expressed confidence in Timothy.
But he also commended Timothy's mother and grandmother, didn't he?
For their unhypocritical faith.
For Loas and Unas, serving Jehovah was not playhacking, their faith was genuine.
What a blessing for Timothy that proved to be.
Well, in a similar way, we can offer specific, sincere, heartfelt commendation to fatherless
children and their parents and commend them for what they're able to do, include them
in spiritual and recreational activities.
When I was a boy, my grandmother used to pick me up every Saturday morning and take me
in the ministry.
I never had to wonder if she was coming, and I never had to wonder who I would work with.
The book study conductor, an older brother, would always include my grandmother and me
in the group with him and his wife.
I cherish those memories.
Pay close attention now, as some who grew up in single-parent homes explained how they
were encouraged to be successful fighters for the faith.
It felt like a bad dream.
Our family were really zealous in the truth.
We were playing downstairs one day, and Mum came down to tell us she was leaving Jehovah
and leaving Dad, saying goodbye to Mum, that was the hardest day of my life.
My mother and father became inactive when I was about four years old.
My father was never really around.
When my Mum started to learn the truth, my Dad said she was forbidden from studying.
If we were to go to the meetings, he would take us out forcibly.
He became verbally and physically abusive to my Mum.
My parents' breakup was very tough.
It was a struggle for my Mum to raise two boys on her own.
She would work two or three jobs, and serving Jehovah just took a back seat.
When my parents divorced, my Mum was very depressed.
She did the best she could, but Jehovah did an intent for mothers to fill both roles
as parents.
My sisters and I, we made a conscious choice that we weren't going to make the same bad
choices that Mum did.
We realised that it's up to us, so I dedicated my life to Jehovah and was baptized when
I was 15.
We thrived spiritually when we didn't have the opposition from Dad.
Now we can go out and service, go to the meetings freely.
We didn't have to hide our literature for fear he would rip them up.
When I was around 15 years old, my Mum took us to the meeting, and she was determined
that this was going to be her last meeting.
It was the night of a local needs party.
It was the right time Jehovah just opened my Mum's heart, why?
After that experience, it was like she was a new woman.
My sisters and I have always been a team.
We pioneered together, we moved to Cambodia to serve as negrators together.
They're both in special full-time service with their husbands in Cambodia, and I've been
serving here in Myanmar Bethel along with my husband for just over 11 years now.
My Mum set a stellar example for me to follow.
Her relationship with Jehovah was always above everything else.
It was her example that helped me to set and reach spiritual goals.
I started pioneering during my senior year of high school, in nearly 20 years of full-time
service, spending most of that time at Brooklyn Bethel and Warwick with my wife.
My Mum had a very strong influence on theocratic goals.
My wife and I had the privilege of attending the first school, the Kingdom Evangelizers,
and currently we're serving in the circuit work.
No one needs to be defined by their negative circumstances.
First Peter 5-10 says, God Himself will complete your training.
It might be tough at times, but what Jehovah's help you can succeed.
It reminds me of what David said in the 27th Psalm in verse 10.
He said, even if my father or mother abandoned me, Jehovah would take me in.
That was definitely the case in my situation.
Jehovah doesn't define us by our upbringing or our past.
He sees our potential, so it's up to us.
With Jehovah we can be anything we want to be.
Well we appreciate those beautiful expressions.
So those of you who are fatherless children.
How do you see yourself?
Do you see yourself as Jehovah sees you?
As a unique individual with potential?
Certainly you're not inferior in any way because of your circumstance.
Did you appreciate the comments made by those in the video?
Your circumstances don't have to define you.
You've circumstances and upbringing do not have to define you.
We would add this, your unique experience in life gives you a unique perspective and
Jehovah may be able to use you to help others.
So be a Timothy.
At a young age, relatively speaking, Timothy was a spiritual man entrusted with responsibility.
The Apostle Paul described him as having a disposition like no one else's.
Timothy cared for others.
You can do the same.
Reach out.
Be a pioneer, a Bethelite, a field missionary, a construction worker, a circuit overseer.
You young brothers qualify and reach out to be a ministerial servant and then an altar.
The opportunities are endless.
Allow Jehovah to use you.
And continue to cultivate appreciation for your loyal parent.
I know I appreciate my mother very much for her fine example of faith through a number
of very trying circumstances.
We don't take the faithfulness of our single parents for granted.
Well, in conclusion, we want to assure you that you can be a successful fighter for the
faith, just as Timothy was.
We have confidence in you and we pray Jehovah's continued, rich blessing on your service
to him.
Brother Joel Dalinger, a helper to the service committee, will consider the final talk of
this symposium, successful fighters for the faith, single Christians.
In this symposium, we've been reminded that Jehovah cherishes and empowers those
who serve him loyally.
In this concluding part of this symposium, we'll focus on single brothers and sisters.
Let's answer three questions.
First, how do we know that married and single Christians all have an honored place in
the congregation?
Second, how can we show that we value and support our fellow believers who are not married?
And third, if you're single, how can you be a successful fighter for the faith?
To begin, let's briefly consider Jehovah's view of married and single Christians.
One thing we love about our God is that Jehovah is not partial.
Regardless of a person's nationality or skin color, anyone who wishes can serve him
acceptably.
Jehovah's impartiality also means that he does not favor married or single Christians
one over the other.
The remaining single, or getting married, is a personal choice.
And nowhere does the Bible state that our value to Jehovah is linked to being either single
or married.
For example, at Matthew chapter 19 and verse 12, Jesus said that some of his followers
would choose to remain single on account of the kingdom.
He then went on to say, let the one who can make room for it make room for it.
Now think about that for a moment.
If a Christian younger or older chooses to remain single for the sake of the kingdom,
Jehovah and Jesus respect such a decision, and they appreciate the good motive behind
that personal choice.
Other Christians are unmarried due to circumstances in life.
For example, some faithful Christians in the congregation are too young to marry.
The apostles have lost a maid due to death or divorce.
The Apostle Paul maintained God's impartial view of both single and married Christians.
Like Jesus, Paul did not teach that Christians should marry or that they should remain single.
In commenting on Paul's first inspired letter to the Corinthians, the watchtower back
in 2012 said this, really, both marriage and singleness can be described as gifts from God.
Jehovah does not view singleness as a cause for shame or grief.
Singleness may bring a Christian certain advantages.
An unmarried Christian who is not weighed down with family responsibilities may have more
time and energy to devote to God's service than a married Christian.
Of course, single Christians do not view themselves as better than married Christians for this reason.
The Bible's message, Jehovah's thinking is clear, isn't it?
Married and single Christians all can have an honored place in the congregation.
Now let's consider our second question.
How can we who are married show that we value and support fellow believers who are not married?
Please open your Bible with me to 1 Corinthians chapter 12 and notice verse 25.
In the context, we notice that Paul is emphasizing that in the Christian congregation, we need
one another.
We depend on one another.
Just as we need all the parts of our literal body, our eyes, our hands, and our feet,
all Christians, single and married are valued and needed.
So how can we show that we appreciate our single brothers and sisters?
Let's read verse 25.
So that there should be no division in the body, and here's the point, but its members
should have mutual concern for one another.
The study edition of the New World Translation says that this expression have mutual concern
for one another could also be rendered as be anxious over one another.
Well, the lesson is clear.
Married Christians, we show appreciation for single brothers and sisters when we show
concern for their welfare, whether that's spiritually or physically.
We do not ignore them, we don't look down on them, nor do we treat them as if we have
very little in common with them.
In this regard, the Apostle Paul said an example worthy of imitation.
He was keenly interested in Timothy's spiritual health and progress.
Those single, Paul saw potential in Timothy and invested in that spiritual man.
And what happened as a result?
An inexperienced, young single Christian became an excellent overseer.
And when the two of them, Paul and Timothy were no longer traveling together, Paul continued
to show genuine interest in Timothy's welfare.
We know that because he wrote two letters that Jehovah has preserved for our benefit in
the Holy Scriptures.
Now can you imagine how Timothy must have felt to have received a letter from his older
friend Paul?
For just a moment, let's put ourselves in Timothy's sandals as we listen to just a few lines
from Paul's first letter.
To Timothy, a genuine child in the faith, may you have undeserved kindness and mercy and
peace from God the Father and Christ Jesus our Lord.
A little later in the letter, Timothy would have read this,
this instruction I entrust to you, my child Timothy, in harmony with the prophecies
that were made about you, that by these you may go on waging the fine warfare.
Then there was this encouragement, do not neglect the gift in you that was given you
through a prophecy when the body of elders laid their hands on you.
Do you think those words of encouragement reassured Timothy and made him feel appreciated
without a doubt?
In the same letter Paul went on to express concern about Timothy's frequent cases of sickness.
Paul's concerned for Timothy's welfare, his spiritual and physical welfare, no doubt
touched Timothy's heart and encouraged him to move forward in Jehovah's service.
And Paul's example touches our heart as well.
We may be moved to ask ourselves, is there more I can do to look out for the needs of
single ones who are exerting themselves in God's service?
Do I wrongly view single ones as incomplete, inferior, or lacking, or do I show them honor?
As a traveling overseer, Timothy was a success.
Paul did not look down on him, rather Paul chose Timothy, a single Christian for weighty
assignments, and gave him the training he needed in order to succeed.
Today I'm sure you and I can think of many practical ways that we can demonstrate our
concern for the welfare of our fellow believers who are unmarried.
The August 2020 issue of the Watchtower provided this reminder in a study article, I read.
We do well to keep in mind that those some single Christians have made it a personal
goal to remain unmarried.
Other Christians would like to marry, but they simply have not found the right person.
Still others may have lost their mate in death.
In any case, should those in the congregation feel the need to ask single Christians why
they are not married, or to offer help to find a mate?
Can we reason on Jehovah's thinking as found in the Scriptures?
We know the answer to that question.
We do not need to ask single ones when they are getting married, nor do we need to pair
them up with other single ones if they have not requested our help.
Instead, we should look for ways to commend them, for their fine example, and assure them
that we love and appreciate them.
In the following dramatization, please note what an elder learned about the challenges
faced by single ones.
Brothers, it's hard to believe this is our last time together.
Wow, we have the Peck Agenda, so let's get started.
This is our last week with our Circuit Overseer before he leaves us for his new Circuit
assignment.
Rick's been a great Circuit Overseer, spiritually mature, experienced, and patient with
us.
Tom?
You thought?
Rick is single, and sadly, there were plenty times we turned that gift into a challenge,
ever since his first visit.
Hello, Jeff.
Yeah, have a minute.
Oh, that.
Longing night.
My washing machine is a clanker.
I just assumed a single brother had lots of free time.
I didn't know how much he had to do on his own.
But there was a lot more I didn't understand.
I got it, yes.
Hello, bye.
Hey.
Look.
They have something there.
It sounds like a great Bible study.
I can't wait to meet her.
Thank you for that.
See you then.
See ya.
That's you.
I don't know what you're waiting for.
For what?
Come on.
A single Circuit Overseer, a Pioneer Sister.
You've got to be looking for a CEO wife.
Well, the teasing was so inappropriate.
And was there at every visit.
Then there were those trying to be, how should I say, helpful?
Look, you want to meet them.
And so I invite them for lunch Saturday.
Rick never asked for that help.
All it did was put him and plenty of sisters
in an awkward situation.
That's what he dealt with week after week.
We all failed at times to see past the single person
to the spiritual man giving Jehovah his best.
We'll miss you.
Just maybe not as much as some of the sisters.
I didn't want to make that mistake again
with any single brother or sister.
Rick, Jeff, thank you.
I learned a lot from you.
And I hope Jehovah blesses you wherever you go.
Thanks, Ray.
Let's now consider our final point.
If you're single, you too can be powerful by faith.
But how?
A great help in building faith is by setting
and reaching spiritual goals.
Of Abraham, Romans chapter 4 and verse 20 says,
because of the promise of God, he did not waver
in a lack of faith.
Like Abraham, we encourage you single brothers and sisters
to frequently meditate on God's promises.
Thinking often about how Jehovah has kept every promise
to us in the past, how he's keeping his promises now,
surely encourages us to remember that he
will keep every promise that he has made for our future.
Doing so strengthens our faith.
Like Jesus, like Paul, like Timothy.
Talk about Jehovah's promises with others
by zealously sharing in the field ministry.
And please, do not isolate yourself
from others in the congregation, thinking
that you have very little to contribute.
No, you have much to contribute
as a faithful brother or sister in the Christian congregation.
We warmly encourage you to reach out and associate
with spiritually mature ones in your congregation,
whether single or married.
Like Timothy, ponder over these things.
Be absorbed in spiritual pursuits
so that your advancement may be plainly manifest to all.
Remember, you are needed and loved.
Well, what have all of us learned
in this faith, strengthening and encouraging symposium?
Please open your Bible with me to Hebrews chapter 11.
Starting in verse 4, you'll notice,
as you scan the verses, that many familiar names
of men and women of faith are outlined for us.
There's Abel and Enoch, Noah, Abraham, Sarah,
Rahab, Gideon, and David, and many more.
All of these men and women
had different circumstances in life.
It's true.
But what did they all have in common?
Notice Hebrews chapter 11 and verse 34.
In the middle of the verse, it tells us,
they were made powerful.
Yes, they were made powerful by faith.
And the same is happening today,
in every congregation of Jehovah's people, earth wide.
Young ones, older ones, men and women,
regardless of our family circumstances,
all of us are being made powerful by faith.
So dear brothers and sisters,
please be assured that we love you and appreciate you.
And may Jehovah bless your efforts
to be a successful fighter for the faith.
Thank you, brothers, for those loving talks.
The time has now arrived for the baptism discourse.
We invite all baptism candidates
to pay particular attention.
And the days ahead, how can you further strengthen your faith?
Why can you be confident that Jehovah will reward your faith?
Listen closely to the answers presented
in the discourse entitled,
exercising faith means everlasting life.
The talk will be given by Brother John Echron,
a helper to the coordinators committee.
All of us around the world rejoice
with you baptismal candidates.
This is a very special occasion for you.
Today you will join millions of your brothers and sisters
in a very special relationship with Jehovah.
I want you to imagine for a moment
that you're in a very large stadium,
and there's eight and a half million
of your brothers and sisters all in this stadium
clapping and so happy to see the stand
you're taking for Jehovah today.
Some of you are young ones that are raised in the truth
and you're sitting with your parents and family.
Others of you may have known the truth years ago
and have recently returned to Jehovah.
Others may have learned the truth recently
and even under these unusual circumstances
of a pandemic in Zoom meetings
have come to the point of dedicating your life to Jehovah.
Whatever your circumstances,
we are so happy that you've made the decision
to get baptized.
Now the theme of our talk with you baptism candidates
is exercising faith means everlasting life.
There's two key words here, exercising and faith.
Faith is your trust and confidence in Jehovah
and his promises.
And exercising your faith is living your life
to do God's will.
You've shown your faith by working hard
to qualify for baptism today.
Now faith is a little bit like building a wood fire.
If you want to build a fire,
you first have to collect some small pieces of wood
and then later you need to have on hand
some larger pieces of wood to keep the fire going.
Likewise, your baptism today is the start of your fire of faith.
Now it's not easy to start a fire at times.
The wood may be wet, the wind keeps blowing out your flame.
Likewise, it may not have been easy for you
to get the fire of your faith started.
You have taken the time and effort
to build your fire of faith.
Now you need to keep that fire of faith burning.
Why?
Well, because our faith can become weak
unless we work to keep it strong.
On one occasion, Jesus said to some of his disciples
that they had little faith.
Let's look at that in Matthew chapter 17 and verse 20.
Matthew 17, 20.
He said to them,
because of your little faith,
for truly I say to you,
if you have faith the size of a mustard grain,
you will say to this mountain,
move from here to there and it will move.
And nothing will be impossible for you.
Jesus was letting them know
that they needed to make their faith stronger.
Now after a fire gets started,
it can often get very large and very hot.
But if there's no wood added to the fire, what happens?
It soon goes out and turns to just cold ashes.
So in order for us to keep our fire of faith burning,
we need to keep feeding it.
Likewise, your fire of faith needs constant attention
to keep burning hot and bright.
Let's consider three questions.
One, how can you feed your fire of faith?
Two, what does it mean to exercise faith?
And three, how will Jehovah reward your faith?
Before we answer those questions, though,
we will talk to two baptized witnesses
who have taken steps to make their faith stronger.
First, let's talk to Yoni Palmo.
Brother Palmo and his wife,
Ellie, serve at Bethel in Finland
and he has faithfully served Jehovah for 60 years.
And I want you to note,
what help Brother Palmo face a test of his faith
early in his binary?
Brother Palmo, can you recall a time
when you had little faith?
Yes, I can recall,
when I was 17, I moved to serve as an auxiliary pioneer
with an isolated group far away from my home.
There, I faced very religious people
who were convinced that we witnesses were wrong
and that I was badly misled.
There are questions about cryptos
I never encountered in my former territory.
The people were very convincing with their arguments
and I felt confused and lost.
I asked myself, are there other questions, too?
I don't have answers, too.
And this started little, my little watering me
and tested my faith.
So there you were, young and isolated
with all those questions.
What did you do to strengthen your faith?
I didn't have bound volumes,
nor was the library or those kinds of tools.
So I wrote a letter to my Leslie Brothers
who at that time went prison
because of refusing military service.
I knew that they had all of our literates there
and they were studying every day the Bible-like scholars.
They saw my situation
and they sent me a letter with answers to all my questions.
I was so happy and thank to Hova
it really strengthened my faith.
Kehova used your brothers in prison to help you.
So how do you think you benefited
from strengthening your faith?
This experience was decisive, a hallmark
to my whole spiritual life.
I understood the value of accurate knowledge
and I studied to collect a library of my own.
I still have my early library
and to me it is something very special.
This experience happened 56 years ago
and since then I have not had any such doubts.
The Hova has given us all the answers we need to know
and even if there are questions
we don't have answers to at the moment.
I have faith that they will be answered by the Hova
in his new time.
Thank you, Brother Palmo.
Your experience really helps us to appreciate
the Bible's answers to life's most complex questions.
Next we can talk to Frankie Brown.
Brother Brown and his wife Karen serve at Bethel
in the United States.
And I want you to pay close attention
to what helped Brother Brown to make the decision
to dedicate his life to Jehovah.
Brother Brown, can you recall a time
when you had little faith?
Until the age of 12, I was raised by my grandmother
who studied with Jehovah's Witnesses.
This is how I was introduced to the truth
and I studied off and on growing up.
At 17, like many young people,
I faced a decision of what to do with my life after school.
Many around me just assumed I'd go off to college
and pursue a career.
However, for my study of the Bible,
I knew I had another choice to make to serve Jehovah.
This was a big decision for me.
At times, I had no idea what I wanted to do.
I was inexperienced and unsure about whose advice to take.
The Bibles or that of well-meaning family and friends.
That's quite a challenging decision for you at that age to make.
What did you do to strengthen your faith?
I realized that I needed to know Jehovah better
and what was involved in serving him.
So I resumed my Bible study and attendance at Christian meetings.
I also began to do personal study.
One personal study project was Psalm 119.
This beautiful Psalm helped me to view Jehovah
as the loving father I never had.
It also helped me to see the wisdom of living in harmony
with the Bible standards.
For example, Psalm 119.99 says,
I have more insight than all my teachers
because I ponder over your reminders.
Essentially, the Psalmist was saying that Jehovah
was his guidance counselor.
Also, I benefited from the good example
of the brothers and sisters in my congregation.
They had already made the decision to serve Jehovah.
And from their life, it was obvious they were truly happy
and had a meaningful life.
This convinced me that serving Jehovah
that was the best way to use my life.
I thanked Jehovah for their good example
and for their efforts to help me at a time when I needed more faith.
Your personal study and help from the brothers and sisters
in your congregation really helped you.
So how do you think you benefited from strengthening your faith?
I got baptized, started pioneering,
and some years later was invited to Bethel.
From my youth onward, I have found security and stability
in my relationship with Jehovah.
When I look back on my decision to dedicate my life to Jehovah
without a doubt, that's the best decision I've ever made.
Whether young or old, Jehovah will not let you down
when you need him the most.
Thank you, Brother Brown, you made a good choice.
Let's go back to our three questions.
Consider our first question.
How can you feed the fire of your faith?
Well, the Bible is our main source of fuel
to feed the fire of our faith.
To feed the fire of our faith, we need to do two things.
We need to read God's Word and meditate on it.
Now, reading God's Word is like adding wood to our fire.
And meditation is a lot like fanning the flames.
Let's discuss these one at a time.
First, let's use the example of the Psalmist in Psalm chapter 1
verses 1 through 3.
Psalm chapter 1 verses 1 through 3.
Happy is the man who does not walk according to the advice
of the wicked, and does not stand on the path of sinners,
and does not sit in the seat of scoffers.
But his delight is in the law of Jehovah,
and he reads his law in an undertone day and night.
He will be like a tree planted by streams of water,
a tree that produces fruit in its season,
the foliage of which does not wither,
and everything he does will succeed.
Well, we want to be like that man in this Psalm.
His delight is in the law of Jehovah.
When we find delight or pleasure in reading God's Word,
it's not like we have to read God's Word,
we want to read God's Word.
He reads his law day and night.
Jehovah wants us to read his Word often.
Prayer is when we speak to Jehovah.
But reading the Bible is when he speaks to us.
I'd like you to notice the beautiful mental picture
that Isaiah gives us of how Jehovah speaks to us
in Isaiah chapter 30 and verse 21.
Isaiah chapter 30 and verse 21.
And your own ears will hear a word behind you saying,
this is the way, walk in it in case you should go to the right
or in case you should go to the left.
Well, why do we hear Jehovah's voice behind us instead of in front of us?
Well, for one thing, Jehovah's words in the Bible
were written many years ago or we could say
in the time or past behind us.
But there's another way to visualize this verse.
Maybe you've been with a group with some small children
and you're walking somewhere where often are the children.
They're out in front running ahead, even if they don't really know where they're going.
And what do the parents behind have to do?
Well, they have to call to them and say, no, no, no, not that way.
We're going to the left here and the children run back
and that's the direction that they go in.
Surely we want to listen carefully for Jehovah's voice behind us
helping us to make the right decisions.
Try to schedule Bible reading as part of your daily routine.
As a suggestion, you can use the schedule for Bible reading
that's found on jdb.org.
To find it, type schedule for Bible reading
in the search field at the top right.
If you read just three to five chapters every day,
you can complete the entire Bible in just one year.
But simply reading God's Word is not enough.
You need to meditate on what you're reading.
Or why should you meditate on what you read in God's Word?
Well, it's because knowing what the right thing is to do
and doing it are not the same.
Meditation is the process of converting knowledge.
That is what we know into wise decisions and actions.
The Bible often associates meditation with the heart.
Now why is that?
Because meditation can convert knowledge.
That is what we know into feelings.
And it is those feelings that drive our actions
and decisions.
We could kind of think of meditation like a bridge.
On this side of the river, we have knowing
what is the right thing to do.
And on this side, we have actually doing it.
Meditation is the bridge that closes the gap
between knowing and doing.
And if we find ourselves always kind of knowing
what the right thing is to do, but not actually doing it,
meditation is the bridge to help us close that gap
between knowing and doing.
Well, how can you meditate on God's Word?
Well, after reading a portion of the Bible
or one of our publications,
take a few moments to think deeply about what you have read.
Ask yourself,
what do I learn about Jehovah when I read this account?
How does this account make me feel about Jehovah?
How can I apply this in my life?
Or how can I use this to help others?
So let's review our first question.
How can you feed the fire of your faith?
Read and meditate on God's Word each day.
Let's look at our second question.
What does it mean to exercise faith?
Well, Jesus told us that more was required
than just believing in Him.
Let's read John chapter 3 and verse 16
to see the emphasis that Jesus put on exercising faith.
John chapter 3 and verse 16.
For God loved the world so much
that He gave His only begotten Son
so that everyone exercising faith in Him
might not be destroyed but have ever lasting life.
So what then does it mean to exercise faith?
A study note on this verse explains
to exercise faith includes the idea
of demonstrating one's strong beliefs or faith
by obeying God.
Now Abraham was a powerful example
of proving his faith by obedience.
Let's look at a very wonderful description
of Abraham's faith in James chapter 2
and verses 21 through 23.
James chapter 2 verses 21 through 23.
Was not Abraham our father declared righteous by works
after he offered up Isaac his son on the altar?
You see that his faith was active along with his works
and his faith was perfected by his works.
And the scripture was fulfilled that says
Abraham put faith in Jehovah
and it was counted to him as righteousness
and he came to be called Jehovah's Friend.
One way read and we meditate on the account of Abraham
we can feel the emotions that he must have felt
and being asked to offer up his son Isaac,
the only son that he and Sarah had.
How could Abraham make such a very difficult decision?
Well long before this,
Abraham had made a decision
that he would obey Jehovah
and serve him in everything.
And that decision years before
to obey Jehovah and all things
helped Abraham to make all the other decisions
in life clear what he should do.
He did not always have to consider
should I do what Jehovah asks or not?
As difficult a request as it was to offer up his son
Abraham did not delay
and took action immediately to obey Jehovah's request.
Now by your baptism today
you're telling everyone
that you have dedicated your life to Jehovah
to serve and obey him
for the rest of your life.
Now let's consider three scriptures
and see how you can show your faith
by your actions.
Once we read each scripture
we'll consider each scripture is part
of your dedication promise
and how you can show your faith in action.
Our first scripture is Hebrews chapter 10 and verse 25.
Hebrews chapter 10 and verse 25.
Not forsaking our meetings together
as some have the custom,
but encouraging one another
and all the more so as you see the day drawing near.
Your dedication promise
I will attend all meetings, assemblies and conventions.
Well how do you show that by faith in action?
Well you really need a job
but you say no to a job
that would mean that you would regularly miss meetings.
You don't have to decide
should I go to meetings or not?
You've already made that decision
when you dedicated yourself to Jehovah.
Our second scripture
Romans chapter 10 and verse 10.
For with the heart one exercises faith for righteousness
but with the mouth
one makes public declaration for salvation.
So your dedication promise
I want everyone to know about Jehovah.
Your faith in action?
Well going to bed early
so that you can get up for field service the next morning.
Auxiliary pioneering when you can.
You schedule field service first
and then other activities later in the day
or adapting to different forms of the ministry
like telephone witnessing or letter writing.
Our third scripture
Mark chapter 11 and verse 24.
This is why I tell you
all the things you pray and ask for
have faith that you have received them
and you will have them.
Well your dedication promise
I will constantly seek Jehovah's direction in prayer.
Your faith in action
when you're tempted to play a violent video game
you reject that game and play something else.
When faced with a serious illness
you pray for calm and wisdom
to make good decisions.
When you feel yourself getting angry with someone
you pray for self control.
Now we could use many more scriptures
and we could give you many more examples
of how you can exercise
and show your faith by your actions.
The point is
that you baptismal candidates
have dedicated your life
to Jehovah and to do his will.
This one decision to dedicate your life
and to live by his standards
sets the spiritual and moral foundation
for all the decisions you will make
from this day forward.
So let's review our second question
what does it mean to exercise faith?
We show our faith by our obedience to God.
Now let's go to our third question
how will Jehovah reward your faith?
Jehovah loves his faithful worshipers
he wants the best for us
and he wants us to be happy.
Jehovah sees every time you do something
to demonstrate your faith
to show faith in action
to be obedient to him.
Now some feel that God or Jehovah
is always watching out for the bad things they do.
Maybe keeping a ledger track
of all these things bad that a person does.
But Jehovah is not doing that.
He's actually looking for the good
and rejoicing in the good that we are doing.
We could kind of illustrate it
the way that many of us
are taking so many pictures these days.
We all have phones, cameras.
We're taking lots of pictures.
And maybe you've noticed that at one point
you take a picture of one of your friends
and they have kind of a funny look on their face
or they are in the middle of eating something.
If you show your friend that picture
what do they often say?
Could you please delete that?
That's not the picture they want you to show
to other people.
And that's not the picture you want to show of them.
Now I want you to imagine for a moment
that Jehovah has a digital photo album of you.
Which pictures do you think he's keeping there?
The ones where we made serious mistakes?
The ones where we did something dumb?
No, based on your repentance
and the ransom sacrifice.
Those are deleted.
They're gone.
He has in his photo album of you
the beautiful pictures,
the beautiful moments that he's proud of
that you showed your faith in action.
Jehovah wants to reward your faith.
In Hebrews chapter 11 and verse 6
we can see how Jehovah feels about his servants
by what he says here about rewarding them.
Hebrews chapter 11 and verse 6.
Moreover, without faith
it is impossible to please God well
for whoever approaches God
must believe that he is
and that he becomes the rewarder
of those earnestly seeking him.
So when listing all these other examples of faith
there in chapter 11 of Hebrews,
the Apostle Paul pauses for a moment
to remind us that Jehovah becomes the rewarder
of those earnestly seeking him.
Now when you take the time
and effort to build a fire,
what reward do you get in return?
Well, you get the warmth and light of that fire.
You can keep yourself and others warm by the fire.
And a fire gives off a beautiful light
that can be very welcome on a dark night.
The sounds of a crackling fire
can make us feel safe and happy.
How will Jehovah reward
his faithful worshippers
for their fire of faith?
Well, ultimately he will reward us
with everlasting life.
During his ministry,
Jesus repeatedly promised
that his faithful servants
would get everlasting life.
Just as Jehovah provided the rewards of a wood fire,
he also provides many gifts
that come when we build
and feed our fire of faith.
Consider some of the rewards
that Jehovah gives us now.
The reward of his word, the Bible,
gives us the best advice for life.
It lights our way
in a spiritually dark world.
The reward of the ministry
the most satisfying work that we can do.
The reward of Holy Spirit,
a powerful helper in times of trials.
Remember you are never alone.
And the reward of our loving group
of brothers and sisters around the world,
a source of great warmth and comfort.
In conclusion,
let's review our three questions.
One, how can you feed your fire of faith?
Read and meditate on God's word each day.
Two, what does it mean to exercise faith?
We show our faith by our obedience to God.
And three, how will Jehovah reward your faith?
Everlasting life.
Please take note of this day.
Remember it.
Write it down.
Each time you hear baptism talk in the future,
take that opportunity to reflect on your baptism
and the many blessings that you have received
because of the decision that you made
to dedicate your life to Jehovah.
Jehovah, want you to be happy and to enjoy life.
All eight and a half million plus
of your brothers and sisters
that are watching this program
are with you and heart and mind
and we want you to be happy.
Keep clear in mind, though,
that happiness is not something
that you can buy for yourself
or get for yourself
or you can't get it by loving yourself.
Just like the warmth and light
are byproducts of a wood fire,
so to happiness is a byproduct
of faith and love
for others and for Jehovah.
We could say that happiness
is the warmth and glow from love's fire.
The world will tell you
you can follow your dreams.
You can be anything you want to be.
But it is far better to let Jehovah dream for you.
Your life serving Jehovah
can be far greater than anything
you could dream up for yourself.
Please, from this day forward,
be determined to keep feeding
and exercising your faith.
Thank you, brother Ekran.
Again, this year,
the circumstances for baptism
will vary in each location.
Be assured that your elders
have made suitable provisions
in accord with local circumstances
for candidates to be baptized
after the conclusion of this session.
And now, let's sing together song number 79,
teach them to stand firm.
After the song,
you may have the prayer offered
from your own location.
Again, that song number 79.